Osteoporosis: risk assessment

Your res ponsibility

The rec ommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful

consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals

and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the

individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service.

It is not mandatory to apply the rec ommendations, and the guideline does not override the

res ponsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in

consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian.

All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment

or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory

Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.

Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a res ponsibility to enable the

guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to

use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and

developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate

unlawful dis crimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health

inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be

inconsistent with complying with those duties.

Commissioners and providers have a res ponsibility to promote an env ironmentally

sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental

impact of implementing NICE rec ommendations wherever possible.

Contents

Using this guideline ..................................................................................................................... 4

Fragility fracture risk assessment .............................................................................................. 5

1.1 Risk factors for fragility fractures ................................................................................................... 5

1.2 Electronic health records ................................................................................................................ 11

1.3 Risk prediction tools ........................................................................................................................ 11

1.4 Bone density assessment ............................................................................................................... 15

Identifying vertebral fragility fractures ......................................................................................20

1.5 DXA-based vertebral fracture assessment (VFA) scan ............................................................... 20

1.6 Using artificial intelligence to identify vertebral fractures .......................................................... 24

Deciding whether pha rmacological treatment is appropriate .................................................25

1.7 Criteria for pha rmacological treatment ......................................................................................... 25

Follow-up for people not having treatment ..............................................................................32

1.8 People who have declined or delayed treatment ......................................................................... 32

1.9 People whose condition did not meet the criteria for treatment ................................................ 32

1.10 Timing of follow-up DXA scans ..................................................................................................... 33

Terms used in this guideline .......................................................................................................37

First-degree relative ............................................................................................................................. 37

Fragility fracture .................................................................................................................................... 37

Major osteoporotic fractures ............................................................................................................... 37

Rec ommendations for research .................................................................................................38

Key rec ommendations for research .................................................................................................... 38

Other rec ommendations for research ................................................................................................. 40

Finding more information and committee details .....................................................................42

Update information .....................................................................................................................43

This guideline replaces CG146.

This guideline is the basis of QS149.

Using this guideline

People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about

their care, as described in NICE's information about shared decision making.

Health and social care practitioners should follow our general guidelines for people

delivering care:

Decision making and mental capacity

Medicines adherence

Medicines optimisation

Multi morbidity

Patient experience in adult NHS services

People's experience in adult social care services

Shared decision making

Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength

(or certainty) of our rec ommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines

(including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent

and mental capacity), and safeguarding.

Fragility fracture risk assessment

1.1 Risk factors for fragility fractures

All people aged 50 and over and women who have experienced menopause

1.1.1

Assess fragility fracture risk in all people aged 50 and over and women who have

experienced menopause with either of the following risk factors:

a previous fragility fracture

current or frequent use of systemic glu cocorticoids (for example, 5 mg or

more prednisolone daily or equivalent for over 3 months, or intermittent use

of higher doses) unless this is a replacement dose for adrenal insufficiency

(see table 2 in NICE's guideline on adrenal insufficiency).

1.1.2

Consider assessing fragility fracture risk in:

all men aged 75 and over

all women aged 65 and over

all people aged 50 to 74 and women aged under 65 who have experienced

menopause with any of the following risk factors:

－ history of 2 or more falls in the last year (see also NICE's guideline on

falls)

－ history of hip fracture in a first-degree relative (particularly if the first-

degree relative was aged under 80 at the time of hip fracture)

－ any other factor associated with increased risk of fragility fracture (see

examples in table 1).

Table 1 Examples of other factors associated with increased risk of fragility fracture

Examples

Hypogonadism in either men or women (including untreated early

menopause or premature ovarian insufficiency [see also NICE's

Hyp erthyroidism

Endocrine

Hyperp arathyroidism (see also NICE's guideline on primary

Hyper pro lac tina emi a

Cushing's disease

Diabetes (type 1 and 2)

Coeliac disease (see also NICE's guideline on coeliac disease)

Crohn's disease and other inflammatory bowel diseases

Chronic liver disease

Chronic pancreatitis (see also NICE's guideline on pancreatitis)

Other causes of malabsorption

Multiple myeloma

Haemog lobinopathies

Systemic mastocytosis

Parkinson's disease and parkinsonism

Neurological

Disease or injury that causes prolonged immobility, such as stroke

or multiple sclerosis (see also NICE's guideline on multiple sclerosis

in adults)

Cystic fibrosis (see also NICE's guideline on cystic fibrosis)

Respiratory

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; see also NICE's

Rheumatoid arthritis

Rheum a to logical

Other inflammatory arthropathies, such as systemic lupus

erythematosus or spon dyloarthritis (see also NICE's guideline on

spon dyloarthritis in over 16s)

Inherited metabolic diseases known to be associated with

osteoporosis such as homo cyst in uri a

Eating disorders related to low BMI such as anorexia nervosa (see

also the section on low bone mineral density in people with

anorexia nervosa in NICE's guideline on eating disorders)

Other

Chronic kidney disease stage 4 and 5 (see also NICE's guideline on

Prolonged immobility

Taking other medicines associated with increased fracture risk (for

example, an ticonvulsants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors,

Men aged under 50 and women aged under 50 who have not experienced menopause

1.1.3

Assess fragility fracture risk in men aged under 50 and women aged under 50

who have not experienced menopause if they have had either:

a previous hip or vertebral fragility fracture or

2 or more major osteoporotic fractures.

1.1.4

Consider assessing fragility fracture risk in men aged under 50 and women aged

under 50 who have not experienced menopause who do not meet the criteria in

recommendation 1.1.3 if they have a different major risk factor, such as:

a previous non-hip, non-vertebral fragility fracture

current or frequent use of systemic glu cocorticoids (for example, 5 mg or

more prednisolone daily or equivalent for over 3 months, or intermittent use

of higher doses) unless this is a replacement dose for adrenal insufficiency

(see table 2 in NICE's guideline on adrenal insufficiency)

untreated early menopause or premature ovarian insufficiency.

1.1.5

When assessing fracture risk in trans or non-binary people, carry out an

i ndividualised risk assessment that also takes into account all of the following:

sex registered at birth

hormonal history (for example, puberty suppression, gender affirming

hormone therapy or menopause)

current hormone treatment, if clinically relevant.

Why the committee made the rec ommendations

The committee agreed the risk factors for fragility fractures included in the 2012 NICE

guideline on osteoporosis were still relevant to current practice and agreed to keep

these in the rec ommendations.

All people aged 50 and over and women who have experienced menopause

The committee agreed that all people aged 50 and over and women who have

experienced menopause are most at risk of fragility fractures. There was also

evidence to support doing a risk assessment if they have had a previous fragility

fracture or they are currently using, or frequently use, systemic glu cocorticoids.

The committee agreed that there is likely to be significantly higher risk of further

fragility fracture in people who have previously had one. They also noted fracture

liaison services should sys tematically identify people aged 50 and over who have had

a fragility fracture with the aim of reducing further fractures. People will only have

been assessed for future fracture risk at the time of the injury if it was diagnosed as a

fragility fracture.

Ongoing or high-dosage use of systemic glu cocorticoids leads to weaker bones and

may cause glucocort icoid-induced osteoporosis. The committee agreed that people

who use these are likely to be at significantly higher risk of fragility fracture. So, they

should have a risk assessment. FRAX includes glucocorticoid exposure as a risk

factor, defined as current or prior use of oral glu cocorticoids at a dose equivalent to

prednisolone 5 mg or more daily used for at least 3 months. The committee agreed to

use this as a starting point for risk and acknowledged that risk increases with higher

doses. The committee also agreed that people who take higher doses i ntermittently,

for example using 3 or more rescue packs of glu cocorticoids for respiratory or other

inflammatory conditions, are also at risk of fragility fracture. They also noted that

NICE's guideline on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in over 16s recommends

monitoring for osteoporosis when using these medicines. The committee also agreed

an exception for physiological equivalent doses of glu cocorticoids taken for adrenal

insufficiency. This condition causes low levels of endogenous cor ticosteroids, so a

replacement dose is needed. As long as the physiological equivalent dose is not

exceeded then this does not increase the person's risk of fragility fracture.

Recent evidence suggests that, for family history as a risk factor, risk is greater if a

relative was under 80 at the time of hip fracture. So, the committee agreed to modify

the recommendation to reflect this. The term 'family history' was also changed to

'first-degree relative' to avoid any mis understanding about a link with other relatives.

For all other risk factors the committee agreed that there was no evidence to change

the 2012 recommendation. So, the committee agreed that risk assessment should still

be considered for the groups listed in recommendation 1.1.2. But the committee also

agreed that the list of factors included in table 1 is not an exhaustive list.

Men aged under 50 and women aged under 50 who have not experienced

menopause

The committee agreed osteoporosis is uncommon in men aged under 50 and women

aged under 50 who have not experienced menopause, so this group should not be

routinely assessed. But as with the older age group they also agreed that if someone

was known to have had a hip or vertebral fragility fracture, or 2 or more major

osteoporotic fractures that happen separately or at the same time, then they should

be assessed for the risk of further fracture. This is because these fractures have a

significant impact on a person's quality of life and may mean they are at risk of having

another fracture. Similarly, people who currently, or frequently, use systemic

glu cocorticoids and those with untreated early menopause or premature ovarian

insufficiency could be at increased risk of fracture despite being younger.

Trans or non-binary people

The committee agreed that a trans or non-binary person's specific circumstances

would need to be taken into account when deciding how to assess fracture risk.

Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:

risk factors for fragility fracture.

How the rec ommendations might affect practice

The rec ommendations remain largely unchanged from the 2012 NICE guideline on

osteoporosis but risk assessment rates vary, particularly for people who have not had

a fragility fracture. These rec ommendations may raise awareness and increase the

number of people being assessed for fracture risk. If this is the case there may be increased resource use related to risk assessment, dual-energy X‑ray abs or pti ome try (DXA) scans, and treatment, but savings because of reduced fragility fractures in the

1.2 Electronic health records

NICE has made a recommendation for research on using electronic health records to help

identify adults who should have a fragility fracture risk assessment.

Why the committee made no rec ommendations

No evidence was identified for electronic health records so the committee made this

recommendation for research. The committee agreed that electronic health records

have the potential to help make it easier to identify people at risk of fragility fracture

who may benefit from treatment.

1.3 Risk prediction tools

1.3.1

Complete a full clinical risk assessment alongside a risk prediction tool to

determine the 10-year risk of major osteoporotic fracture using:

either FRAX or QFracture for people aged between 40 and 90

QFracture for people aged between 30 and 39.

1.3.2

If using risk prediction tools to assess fragility fracture risk for people aged

over 90, be aware that:

FRAX calculates the risk assuming the person is aged 90

QFracture calculates a risk score for the number of years up to the age of

100.

1.3.3 Use the same risk prediction tool throughout a person's care.

1.3.4

When assessing risk, take into account that fragility fracture risk is decreased

while taking systemic hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Use the discussion

aid on HRT for the incidence of fragility fractures in women taking HRT in NICE's

1.3.5

Seek advice from a specialist when assessing fragility fracture risk in people:

aged under 30 or

with rare forms of osteoporosis such as suspected idiopathic osteoporosis (in

men aged under 50 or women aged under 50 who have not experienced

menopause) or suspected pregnancy associated osteoporosis or

with another suspected rare bone disease associated with fragility fractures,

Why the committee made the rec ommendations

When assessing risk in people aged 30 and over, the committee agreed that either

FRAX or QFracture should be used. This is similar to the recommendation made in the

2012 NICE guideline on osteoporosis because recent evidence has not shown an

advantage of using 1 tool over the other. For people who have not had a previous hip

or vertebral fragility fracture, a single major osteoporotic fragility fracture in the last

2 years, or 2 or more fragility fractures, the committee agreed that it is best to use a

risk prediction tool first because it helps avoid unnecessary DXA scans. FRAX only

applies to people over the age of 40, so the committee recommended using QFracture for people between the ages of 30 and 39. A 10‑year risk of major osteoporotic fracture is generally used when calculating risk from FRAX or QFracture, so the

committee recommended this.

Risk prediction tools may not provide an accurate assessment of risk in people

over 90. So, the committee agreed healthcare professionals would need to take this

into account when using risk tools for this age group. In this group, FRAX calculates

risk by assuming the person is aged 90. While QFracture can provide a risk score for

people up to the age of 99, it covers fewer years. For example, it will estimate an 8‑year risk score for people aged 92 or a 7‑year risk score for people aged 93. But the committee agreed that this would still provide useful information when assessing a

person's risk.

The committee emphasised the importance of doing a full clinical risk assessment

because neither tool includes all factors associated with an increased risk of fracture

(for example, if a person is taking medicines associated with accelerated bone loss

such as aromatase inhibitors or androgen deprivation therapy). They also noted that

the same risk prediction tool should be used throughout a person's care. This is

because FRAX and QFracture assess risk differently, for example, quantity dependent

risk factors may not be treated as continuous variables. Alcohol intake is measured in

FRAX as either over or under 3 units per day, whereas in QFracture there are several

levels of alcohol intake. FRAX also has fewer criteria than QFracture so is less

detailed. In contrast, FRAX gives a risk score adjusted for mortality whereas QFracture

does not. QFracture also includes oes trogen-only hormone replacement therapy

(HRT) use in its assessment. The committee agreed that when doing the risk

assessment, it is important to take into account that systemic HRT can reduce the risk

of fracture.

When assessing fragility fractures for some groups the committee agreed that advice

from a specialist should be sought to understand the impact of potential causes or

risk factors on the person's fracture risk. For people under the age of 30 they agreed

it is important to treat the underlying cause before any osteoporosis treatments are

considered. Advice from a specialist is also needed when the person is suspected of

having a rare form of osteoporosis or another rare bone disease because the person

is likely to need different management to most people with osteoporosis.

A single study was found on the risk prediction tool CFracture (developed in 2023)

that uses the same risk factors as QFracture. A recommendation for research to

validate the CFracture tool was made because there is limited evidence and the

calculator is not currently available. There was 1 study (limited to women aged 65 and

over) on the vertebral fracture clinical decision tool (Vfrac) that was developed to

identify people with a suspected vertebral fracture. The committee made a

recommendation for research on identifying vertebral fractures because there is

limited evidence.

Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C:

validity of fragility fracture risk prediction tools and the cost effectiveness section in

evidence review E: effectiveness of fragility fracture risk prediction tools.

How the rec ommendations might affect practice

The recommendation about choice of risk prediction tool reflects current practice and

rec ommendations from the 2012 NICE guideline on osteoporosis. The costs of using

FRAX and QFracture are similar because they take a similar amount of time to

complete, and both have freely available online calculators. Seeking advice for rare

bone diseases from a specialist is likely to be current practice and unlikely to have a

1.4 Bone density assessment

Bone mineral density (BMD) measurement with a dual-energy X- ray abs or pti ome try (DXA) scan

1.4.1

Offer a DXA scan to measure BMD (with or without completing a risk prediction

tool) when assessing fragility fracture risk in people aged 30 and over who have

had:

a previous hip or vertebral fragility fracture or

a single major osteoporotic fragility fracture in the last 2 years or

2 or more fragility fractures.

If a DXA scan is not tolerated, not technically feasible, or not needed for

treatment or monitoring decisions, see recommendation 1.7.4.

1.4.2

Consider BMD measurement with a DXA scan to help guide treatment decisions for people with a 10‑year risk of major osteoporotic fracture of 10% or more.

1.4.3

Seek advice from a specialist for people with, or suspected of, primary

hyperp arathyroidism and follow rec ommendations 1.1.1, 1.3.1 and 1.6.1 in NICE's

DXA scans when starting treatment

1.4.4

Do a baseline BMD measurement with a DXA scan when starting treatment,

unless it is not tolerated, not technically feasible, or not needed for treatment or

monitoring decisions (see recommendation 1.7.4).

1.4.5

If there is likely to be a significant delay in doing a DXA scan before treatment,

consider either:

fast-tracking people for a DXA scan within 6 weeks if they are likely to need

anabolic (bone-forming) treatment

starting a ntiresorptive treatment (to slow the rate of bone breakdown) if the

person is unlikely to need anabolic treatment.

Why the committee made the rec ommendations

Most of the evidence to assess fracture risk was on DXA scans, and this is the

method used in current practice. The evidence for other bone density assessment

techniques was limited and did not support a change to current practice. Two studies

found possible utility using quantitative computed tomography (QCT) while a single

study found possible utility using radio frequency echographic multi spectrometry

(REMS), an ultrasound based bone density assessment technique, and the committee

made rec ommendations for research on REMS, DXA with trabecular bone score (TBS)

BMD measurement with a DXA scan

People aged 30 and over who have had a previous hip or vertebral fragility fracture, a

single major osteoporotic fragility fracture in the last 2 years, or 2 or more fragility

fractures, are likely to have a risk score above the threshold for a DXA scan, or an

underlying condition that needs their bone density assessed. So, the committee

agreed that bone mineral density (BMD) should be measured with a DXA scan to help

guide treatment decisions without the need for completing a risk prediction tool. Risk

may still be calculated with risk prediction tools for some people in this group if it is

useful for clinical decision making or communicating risk to the person. There may be

some people, particularly older people, where it may be clear their condition needs

treatment and a DXA scan is not needed to decide whether to treat, which treatment

to offer or for monitoring.

A 10‑year major osteoporotic fracture risk of 10% or more was used to decide who should have a DXA scan (if they did not meet the criteria for recommendation 1.4.1 in

the section on bone density assessment). This threshold was decided by committee

consensus after considering various risk thresholds and their impact. The committee

agreed that a 5% threshold could lead to over investigation with DXA scans and

increased burden on the healthcare system, while a 20% threshold could lead to

missed opportunities for early treatment and prevention of fragility fractures. There

was also uncertainty about treatment benefits at lower risk levels because people

included in treatment trials were not likely to have a risk score below 10%. A single

threshold was considered to have advantages over age-dependent thresholds

because it was simpler to implement for non specialists, and this may improve the

i mplementation of risk assessment.

DXA scans when starting treatment

BMD measurement can inform decisions about whether treatment is appropriate,

inform discussions with people about the need for treatment, impact treatment choice

and provide a baseline for future treatment monitoring.

A baseline BMD measurement is usually needed to determine treatment eligibility

before an anabolic treatment can be started. The committee noted that it is not

advisable to start an a ntiresorptive treatment then stop and switch to an anabolic

treatment. So, the committee recommended that people who are likely to need

anabolic treatment could be fast-tracked for a DXA scan, if the wait is likely to be

more than 6 weeks (in line with the NHS England 6-week diagnostic target), to

prevent a delay to starting treatment. For example, someone who has had 1 or more

at least 1 anabolic

follow-on treatment with a ntiresorptive after completion of anabolic.

If it is unlikely that anabolic treatment will be needed, then the committee agreed that

the person can start a ntiresorptive treatment while waiting for a DXA scan. They

recommended this because BMD is unlikely to change much within 2 years, and they

agreed it is important that treatment is not delayed if a DXA scan is not available. A

DXA scan would still be needed as a baseline to compare with future measurements

of BMD when assessing the effectiveness of treatment.

Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D:

accuracy of bone assessment methods and evidence review E: effectiveness of

fragility fracture risk prediction tools.

How the rec ommendations might affect practice

Using a DXA scan to assess BMD reflects current practice.

The recommendation to go straight to a DXA scan for people with a hip or vertebral

fragility fracture or 2 or more fragility fractures without needing a risk assessment

first may be a change in practice in some areas. But it is unlikely to result in a

substantial resource impact to the NHS because an appointment would still be

needed to discuss referral for a DXA scan and DXA scan referral numbers are likely to

be similar.

The recommendation to use a 10‑year major osteoporotic fracture risk estimate threshold of 10% to determine eligibility for DXA scans for people with a single non-

hip, non-vertebral fragility fracture, or no prior fracture but other clinical risk factors,

is a change from the recommendation in the 2012 NICE guideline on osteoporosis and

common current practice. Many areas will currently be using the National

Osteoporosis Guideline Group (NOGG) age-dependent criteria for BMD assessment.

This updated guidance is likely to result in lower DXA-related resource use if risk

assessment rates remain the same.

Identifying vertebral fragility fractures

1.5 DXA-based vertebral fracture assessment (VFA) scan

1.5.1 Consider doing a VFA when doing a DXA scan for:

men aged 70 and over

women aged 60 and over.

1.5.2

Consider doing a VFA when doing a DXA scan for men aged under 70 and women aged under 60 with any of the following:

a previous major osteoporotic fracture

signs or symptoms of vertebral fracture, for example:

－ history of back pain or radiating rib pain with no identified cause

－ change in body shape (for example, height loss over 4 cm or changes

exaggerated kyphosis)

－ suspicion of vertebral fracture from the DXA scan

current or frequent use of systemic glu cocorticoids (for example, 5 mg or

more prednisolone daily or equivalent for over 3 months, or intermittent use

of higher doses) unless this is a replacement dose for adrenal insufficiency

(see table 2 in NICE's guideline on adrenal insufficiency)

exceptionally low BMD for their age (for example, a Z-score of less than -2).

1.5.3

Do not do a VFA when doing a DXA scan if any of the following apply:

the person has had spinal imaging in the past 3 months and has no

scoliosis may affect the i nterpretation

the person's body mass exceeds the threshold for reliable reading as per

1.5.4

Do not routinely do spinal imaging after VFA has identified a fracture unless there

is either:

uncertainty whether a fracture is present or

concern about a differential diagnosis.

Why the committee made the rec ommendations

The committee discussed that vertebral fractures are the most common type of

osteoporotic fracture but people often have no symptoms and so they can go

undiagnosed. Identifying a vertebral fracture is important because it may mean

someone's condition is eligible for treatment that would not be otherwise or that a

different treatment is needed. Vertebral fracture assessment (VFA) adds some

additional time to a DXA scan and for reviewing and reporting but will lead to

reductions in fractures through improved treatment. It could reduce reliance on

conventional radiography to identify vertebral fractures and exposure to higher doses

of ionising radiation. People would also benefit from having all relevant scans on the

same visit rather than having a DXA scan and then needing to return for further

radiography in a separate visit.

Cost effectiveness evidence was available in people 50 years and over with a fracture

having a DXA scan and people aged 65 to 80 years at high risk of vertebral fracture

having a DXA scan. But the committee agreed that because of current low

i dentification rates of vertebral fractures, wider rec ommendations to consider VFA

when doing DXA scans were likely to be cost effective. They prioritised

rec ommendations for groups where risk of vertebral fracture was higher.

The committee was aware of evidence suggesting a higher incidence of vertebral

fractures in men aged 70 and over and women aged 60 and over. So, they agreed that

people in this age range who are having a DXA scan should also be considered for a

VFA at the same visit.

This evidence also suggested men aged under 70 and women aged under 60 are less

likely to have a vertebral fracture. So, the committee agreed that DXA-based VFA

should only be for people at high risk of having a vertebral fracture in this age group.

The committee agreed that DXA-based VFA should not be done if the person has had

recent spinal imaging and no symptoms because it is unlikely to identify a fracture.

They also agreed that it should not be done if the person has scoliosis that is likely to

affect the i nterpretation (for example, severe scoliosis can make it difficult to interpret

the results) or their body mass exceeds local guidelines because the scan results

would not be easy to interpret accurately.

Several studies suggested that doing a VFA when doing a DXA scan had a low risk of

misdiagnosing vertebral fractures with high specificity reported in the per-vertebral

analysis from low-quality evidence. This means that if DXA-based VFA positively

identifies a person as having a fracture, it is highly likely to be accurate. So, the

committee recommended that if a person's VFA is positive, then there is no need to do

further spinal imaging unless there are specific concerns. These could include an

uncertainty from a borderline VFA scan, or the fracture could be caused by a different

condition to osteoporosis, such as a pathological fracture in a person with a history of

breast cancer.

Most evidence on accuracy of DXA-based VFA scans uses older scanners and shows

low specificity. Recent scanners have increased image quality and resolution, which

should result in better accuracy (for both sensitivity and specificity) for detecting

vertebral fractures. So, the committee made a recommendation for research on the

accuracy of DXA-based VFA.

Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G:

diagnosing vertebral fractures with DXA-based VFA.

How the rec ommendations might affect practice

Incorporating VFA scans into DXA scan appointments for men aged 70 and over and

women aged 60 and over will be a change in practice. Currently, VFA is limited to

some groups of people or not used at all. Additional staff time will also be needed to

carry out, review and report VFAs. In most cases, additional scanning time should be

able to be accommodated within existing DXA slots but appropriate scheduling of

less mobile patients may be needed. DXA capacity should therefore not be impacted.

Ensuring sufficient reporting capacity is available will be important for

i mplementation. There may also be additional staff training costs to enable expanded

access. Increased capital investment is not anticipated because most current DXA

scanners have the capacity to do VFA.

In some areas, it is common to do spinal imaging to confirm a vertebral fracture

identified on VFA. Where VFA is currently used, it will displace spinal imaging to look

for vertebral fracture at lower cost in some people. But the population recommended

for VFA will be broader than that currently having spinal radiograph and a small

proportion of VFA results may need a subsequent spinal image when there is

uncertainty. Overall, a net reduction in spinal images is anticipated.

Increased use of VFA in the NHS is expected to increase i dentification of vertebral

fractures, which are often missed in current practice. This is expected to result in

increased and better targeted treatment that will reduce fractures.

The committee concluded that the overall financial impact of the new

rec ommendations on the NHS is not likely to be significant over the long term.

1.6 Using artificial intelligence to identify vertebral fractures

NICE has published Health Tech guidance on artificial intelligence (AI) technologies to aid

opportunistic detection of vertebral fragility fractures that can be used in the NHS, while

more evidence is generated.

Deciding whether pha rmacological treatment is appropriate

1.7 Criteria for pha rmacological treatment

1.7.1

Make a shared decision with the person about whether to start pha rmacological

treatment based on the following:

10‑year risk of major osteoporotic fracture obtained from FRAX or QFracture

BMD from a DXA scan (if available)

the number, timing and skeletal sites of previous fragility fractures (especially

hip or vertebral fractures)

a clinical assessment of risk factors (see the section on risk factors for

fragility fractures), including those not specifically included in the risk

1.7.2

Make a shared decision with trans or non-binary people about whether to start

pha rmacological treatment (see rec ommendations 1.7.1 and 1.7.3) that also takes

sex registered at birth

hormonal history (for example, puberty suppression, gender affirming

hormone therapy or menopause)

current hormone treatment, if clinically relevant.

1.7.3

Consider pha rmacological treatment for all people aged 50 and over and women

who have experienced menopause (see rec ommendations 1.4.1 and 1.4.2) if they

have any of the following:

a previous hip or vertebral fragility fracture

very high-dose systemic glu cocorticoids (for example, 15 mg or more

prednisolone daily or equivalent) taken for 3 months or more

BMD T-score of -2.5 or less

BMD T-score of -1.5 or less with any of the following:

－ a previous fragility fracture

－ current or frequent use of systemic glu cocorticoids (for example, 5 mg or more prednisolone daily or equivalent for over 3 months, or intermittent

use of higher doses) unless this is a replacement dose for adrenal

insufficiency (see table 2 in NICE's guideline on adrenal insufficiency)

－ taking medicines or having other factors known to be associated with accelerated bone loss (for example, aromatase inhibitors or androgen

deprivation therapy, or having primary hyperp arathyroidism not treated

1.7.4

Make a shared decision with the person about whether to start pha rmacological

treatment (see recommendation 1.7.1) without a DXA scan if their condition meets

the criteria (see rec ommendations 1.4.1 and 1.4.2) but for whom a DXA scan is

not tolerated or technically feasible, or

not needed to inform a decision to start treatment or to provide a baseline for

long-term monitoring (for example, for older people living with frailty).

1.7.5

Seek advice from a specialist about treatment options for:

men aged under 50 and women aged under 50 who have not experienced

menopause who have any of the following:

－ a previous major osteoporotic fracture or

－ significant decrease in BMD on serial measurements or

－ suspected or confirmed idiopathic osteoporosis

women, trans men and non-binary people with a suspected or confirmed rare

form of osteoporosis such as pregnancy associated osteoporosis or

people with another suspected or confirmed rare bone disease associated

Why the committee made the rec ommendations

The committee agreed that determining who would benefit from treatment is not

str aightforward. Based on their knowledge and experience they agreed that several

factors need to be taken into account.

A person's 10‑year risk of major osteoporotic fracture obtained from FRAX or QFracture gives a percentage estimate of how likely it is they will develop a hip,

(symptomatic) spine, shoulder, or wrist fragility fracture. But the committee agreed

that predicted risk should not be used alone to determine whether treatment is

appropriate. While it gives a probability of fracture, it still needs to be put into the

context of a person's risk factors, clinical circumstances and whether the fracture risk

is likely to be reduced with pha rmacological treatment. The committee also agreed

that how recently a fracture occurred, particularly a major osteoporotic fracture, is

also important with the greatest risk of a subsequent fragility fracture being in the

first 2 years after an initial fragility fracture.

All people aged 50 and over and women who have experienced menopause

Previous fragility fractures increase the likelihood of getting another fracture. The

committee agreed this is particularly the case when there have been multiple fragility

fractures, which is not taken into account in the risk prediction tools, or a hip or

vertebral fracture. There is also a higher risk after a recent fragility fracture, which

reduces over time. Overall fracture risk increases with age. But the magnitude of

additional risk associated with recent fracture is more pronounced in younger people.

The committee agreed that people taking very high-dose systemic glu cocorticoids

are at particularly high risk of fracture. So, the committee agreed that treatment

should be considered for anyone meeting this criterion. Although the committee gave

an example of a very high-dose of systemic glu cocorticoids, they agreed that

glucocort icoid-induced bone loss is dose dependent and affected by other risk

factors such as age.

The committee discussed the role of BMD in deciding whether a person would benefit

from treatment. They highlighted that BMD is a continuum and that the lower a

person's BMD the lower their bone strength. They agreed that while the World Health

Organization use BMD T-score to define osteoporosis and osteopenia (T-score of -2.5

or less for osteoporosis, and between -2.5 and -1 for osteopenia) there is no specific

BMD threshold below which treatment becomes effective. They highlighted that most

of the evidence relating to treatment is from people with a low BMD and that much of

that evidence is in people with a BMD T-score of -2.5 or less. Evidence also suggests

there is less reduction in the relative risk when a person has a higher BMD, so there is

uncertainty whether treating this group is beneficial. Overall, the committee agreed

that a BMD measurement, when available, allows healthcare professionals and people

at risk of fragility fracture to make informed choices about whether treatment is

appropriate, and which one would be the best option.

For all people aged 50 and over and women who have experienced menopause, the

committee made rec ommendations based on their own experience and expertise.

They agreed that BMD T-score of -2.5 or less in most circumstances indicates a high

risk of fracture and that treatment should be considered. It was less clear for people

with osteopenia, and most people would not be at risk. But treatment should be

considered depending on certain risk criteria. People with a BMD T-score of -1.5 or

less and a fragility fracture, current or frequent systemic glucocorticoid use, or

medicines or secondary causes known to be associated with accelerated bone loss

are likely to be at increased risk and should be considered for treatment. Also at

increased risk are people with primary hyperp arathyroidism not treated with surgery,

which includes those waiting for surgery or receiving alternative treatment.

If a DXA scan is not possible or not needed

DXA scans are not always technically feasible (for example, if there is a metal implant

in both hips and the lumbar spine is compromised because of metal implants,

fractures or degenerative changes), or tolerated (for example, if a person is living with

frailty or has a physical impairment that makes positioning on a scanner impossible).

In those circumstances the committee agreed that treatment should be considered

based on the other factors listed in recommendation 1.7.1 if the person's condition has

met the criteria for a DXA scan. This is to ensure people are not left without treatment

because no DXA scan is available.

DXA scans may not always be needed to decide whether to treat. This can be the

case for older people living with frailty, who are likely to have a low BMD and high risk

of fracture. If a DXA scan is not needed to decide whether to treat, which treatment to

give or for monitoring, then the committee agreed that the healthcare professional

should discuss with the person whether to treat without a DXA scan.

Men aged under 50, women aged under 50 who have not experienced menopause

and people with a suspected rare bone disease associated with fragility fractures

Fragility fracture in men aged under 50 and women aged under 50 who have not

experienced menopause is uncommon. So, the committee agreed that advice from a

specialist would be needed to establish the cause and consider the need for

treatment if they have had a major osteoporotic fracture, significant decrease in BMD

on serial measurements or idiopathic osteoporosis. Advice from a specialist is also

needed for women with suspected or confirmed pregnancy associated osteoporosis

or people with another suspected or confirmed rare bone disease associated with

fragility fractures because they are likely to need different treatment options to most

people with osteoporosis.

Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E:

effectiveness of fragility fracture risk prediction tools.

How the rec ommendations might affect practice

The committee discussed that, in current practice, criteria for DXA scans and

treatment vary locally but in England they are usually based on NOGG guidance. The

new rec ommendations will therefore be a change in clinical practice. They agreed

that, based on the cost analysis, the new rec ommendations covering revised DXA

scan and treatment criteria should be associated with lower DXA-related resource

use than the approach based on NOGG guidance. This is because when all scans

relating to starting treatment are taken into account, not just those needed to

determine eligibility for treatment, anyone considered for treatment by the NOGG

approach would receive a DXA scan before treatment is started. Treatment related

resource use was not anticipated to increase and may decrease because of better

targeting of treatment.

But the committee highlighted that risk assessment rates are currently low,

particularly for people who have not had a fragility fracture. If risk assessment

increases, resource use associated with DXA scans and treatment will also increase

because more people will be identified. This will be irrespective of which criteria for

DXA scans and treatment are used. The committee reiterated the importance of

limiting risk assessment for people who have not had a fragility fracture to those with

clinical risk factors to ensure resource use is best targeted to those most likely to

benefit from treatment and to avoid unnecessary DXA scans.

Follow-up for people not having treatment

1.8 People who have declined or delayed treatment

1.8.1

Advise people who have declined or delayed treatment:

when and how to re-access the service and

to contact their GP if they change their mind or their clinical circumstances

change.

1.9 People whose condition did not meet the criteria for treatment

1.9.1

For people with a 10‑year risk of major osteoporotic fracture of less than 10%, consider reassessing their risk using the same risk prediction tool used at the

baseline assessment:

when there is any change in their clinical circumstances (for example, a

fragility fracture or other new risk factor as listed in the section on risk

factors for fragility fractures) or

at 5 years if there are no changes in clinical circumstances.

1.9.2

For people with a 10‑year risk of major osteoporotic fracture of 10% or more, or who had a DXA scan to assess their bone health, but whose condition did not

meet the criteria for treatment:

consider reassessing their BMD with a DXA scan (and a VFA if they meet the

criteria in the rec ommendations in the section on DXA-based VFA scan):

－ within 2 to 3 years if their condition was close to meeting the criteria for treatment, especially if they have a significant risk of accelerated bone loss or

－ if there is any change in their clinical circumstances (for example, a

fragility fracture or other new risk factor as listed in the section on risk

factors for fragility fractures) unless this is within 2 years of their most

recent DXA scan

－ at 5 years if there are no changes in clinical circumstances.

consider their need for treatment without reassessing their BMD with a DXA

scan if their clinical circumstances change within 2 years of their most recent

DXA scan.

1.10 Timing of follow-up DXA scans

1.10.1

Do not routinely repeat a DXA scan within 2 years of the person's most recent

DXA scan unless there are exceptional circumstances.

Why the committee made the rec ommendations

There was no evidence on follow-up for people who had a risk assessment but had

not started treatment. The committee agreed it was important to advise people when

they could be reassessed and so made consensus rec ommendations.

People who have declined or delayed treatment

Some people whose condition has met the criteria for treatment may decline or delay

treatment. There can be several reasons for this including:

to try lifestyle changes first

to treat a different condition first (such as dental problems or cancer)

adverse effects of treatment

personal reasons such as caring res ponsibilities.

In all of these situations, the committee agreed it was important to agree an

appropriate time to revisit the person's decision with them, to ensure they have

access to treatment should they want it later, and to re-evaluate their risk because

this will increase with age, even if they have no new risk factors. Advice should also

be given on who to contact should their clinical circumstances change, or they

change their mind.

People whose condition did not meet the criteria for treatment

People who had a risk assessment but did not meet the criteria for treatment are still

likely to be at increased risk of fracture compared with the general population, and

this risk is likely to increase as they get older.

So, the committee agreed that people who have a 10‑year fracture risk of less than 10% should be considered for reassessment at 5 years, unless their clinical

circumstances change. This time period would be long enough to see an age-related

change. But if there was a change in clinical circumstances that would negatively

impact bone health within 5 years, this could imply a change in risk and warrant

reassessment. The committee agreed the same risk assessment tool used at the

person's baseline assessment should be used again to give an accurate reflection of a

change to their risk score.

The committee agreed that it was important to consider reassessing people who had 10‑year risk of major osteoporotic fracture of 10% or more, or who had a DXA scan to assess their risk of fracture, but whose condition did not meet the criteria for

treatment. They agreed their BMD should be assessed with a DXA scan. This is because the effect of age means the person's 10‑year risk of major osteoporotic fracture derived from a risk prediction tool is unlikely to show a lower risk score

whereas their bone density is likely to have changed with age. If a person's condition

was originally close to meeting the criteria for treatment, then the committee agreed

that 2 to 3 years was enough time for the person's bone density to have changed to a

point that treatment may be advisable. This is particularly the case for people with a

significant risk of accelerated bone loss including people with primary

hyperp arathyroidism not treated with surgery, or taking aromatase inhibitors,

androgen deprivation therapy, or systemic glu cocorticoids. For other people, the

committee agreed there was no need to reassess them for 5 years unless their clinical

circumstances change. The committee agreed a VFA should also be done at the same

time as the DXA scan if they meet the criteria in the rec ommendations in section 1.5.

This is because the person may have had a vertebral fracture in the time since the last

DXA scan.

Timing of follow-up DXA scans

The committee agreed that a DXA scan should not be repeated within 2 years. This is

because this time period is too short to show a clinically meaningful change in BMD.

There are exceptions to this, including if the person has a high risk of accelerated

bone loss, for example if they are using medicines known to cause a reduction in bone

density such as high-dose systemic glu cocorticoids.

Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H:

fracture risk monitoring in non-treatment groups.

How the rec ommendations might affect practice

These rec ommendations are likely to be cost neutral or cost saving because they will

not lead to a substantial change in clinical practice and may reduce unnecessary

reassessment in some areas by clarifying minimum durations between

Terms used in this guideline

This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline.

Fragility fracture

Fractures associated with osteoporosis, typically caused by low-impact injuries that would

not normally cause a fracture (such as a fall from standing height) and sometimes called

low-trauma fractures. Fragility fractures can occur spontaneously in people with no history

of injury. Most vertebral fragility fractures are not caused by falls, instead happening after

activities involving lifting, twisting, or bending. Fragility fractures most commonly affect

the spine (vertebral column), hip, shoulder (proximal humerus), and wrist (distal forearm).

But fragility fractures can happen in any bone, and some fractures (for example, pelvis and

rib fractures) are just as strongly associated with reduced bone strength as the most

common fragility fractures. Fragility fractures can occur from causes other than

osteoporosis such as other bone diseases or malignancy.

Major osteoporotic fractures

Fragility fractures in the spine, hip, shoulder, and wrist.

Rec ommendations for research

The guideline committee has made the following rec ommendations for research.

Key rec ommendations for research

1 Using electronic health records to help identify adults who should have a fragility fracture risk assessment

What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of searching and analysing electronic health

records and social care records (including GP practice lists and imaging archives, for

example PACS [picture archiving and communication system]) to help identify adults who

should have a fragility fracture risk assessment?

Why the committee made the recommendation for research

No evidence was identified for electronic health records so the committee made a

recommendation for research on using electronic health records to help identify adults

who should have a fragility fracture risk assessment. The committee agreed that

electronic health records have the potential to help make it easier to identify people at

risk of fragility fracture who may benefit from treatment.

Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B:

searching and analysis of electronic health records.

2 Risk prediction tools

What is the validity of the CFracture risk prediction tool for predicting the risk of fragility

fractures in adults, including those who have had a previous fragility fracture?

Why the committee made the recommendation for research

A single study was found on the risk prediction tool CFracture (developed in 2023)

that uses the same risk factors as QFracture. A recommendation for research to

validate the CFracture tool was made because there is limited evidence and the

calculator is not currently available.

Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C:

validity of fragility fracture risk prediction tools.

3 Radio frequency echographic multi spectrometry (REMS)

What is the accuracy of REMS for predicting fragility fractures in adults, including those

who have had a previous fragility fracture?

Why the committee made the recommendation for research

Most of the evidence to assess fracture risk was on DXA scans and this is the method

used in current practice. The evidence for other bone density assessment techniques

was limited and did not support a change to current practice. Two studies found

possible utility using quantitative computed tomography (QCT) while a single study

found possible utility using radio frequency echographic multi spectrometry (REMS),

an ultrasound based bone density assessment technique, and the committee made

rec ommendations for research on REMS, DXA with trabecular bone score (TBS)

assessment and QCT.

Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D:

accuracy of bone assessment methods.

4 Dual-energy X-ray abs or pti ome try (DXA)-based vertebral fracture assessment (VFA) scan

What is the diagnostic accuracy of DXA-based VFA scans for identifying vertebral fracture

in adults having a DXA scan?

Why the committee made the recommendation for research

Most evidence on accuracy of DXA-based VFA scans uses older scanners and shows

low specificity. Recent scanners have increased image quality and resolution, which

should result in better accuracy (for both sensitivity and specificity) for detecting

vertebral fractures. So, the committee made a recommendation for research on the

accuracy of DXA-based VFA.

Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G:

diagnosing vertebral fractures with DXA-based VFA.

5 Identifying vertebral fractures

What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of Vfrac (vertebral fracture clinical decision

tool) to identify people with a vertebral fracture?

Why the committee made the recommendation for research

There was 1 study (limited to women aged 65 and over) on the vertebral fracture

clinical decision tool (Vfrac) that was developed to identify people with a suspected

vertebral fracture. The committee made a recommendation for research on identifying

vertebral fractures because there is limited evidence.

Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F:

6 DXA with trabecular bone score (TBS) assessment

What is the accuracy of DXA with TBS assessment for predicting fragility fractures in

adults, including those who have had a previous fragility fracture?

Why the committee made the recommendation for research

Most of the evidence to assess fracture risk was on DXA scans and this is the method

used in current practice. The evidence for other bone density assessment techniques

was limited and did not support a change to current practice. Two studies found

possible utility using quantitative computed tomography (QCT) while a single study

found possible utility using radio frequency echographic multi spectrometry (REMS),

an ultrasound based bone density assessment technique, and the committee made

rec ommendations for research on REMS, DXA with trabecular bone score (TBS)

assessment and QCT.

Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D:

accuracy of bone assessment methods.

7 Quantitative computed tomography (QCT)

What is the accuracy of QCT for predicting fragility fractures in adults, including those who

have had a previous fragility fracture?

Why the committee made the recommendation for research

Most of the evidence to assess fracture risk was on DXA scans and this is the method

used in current practice. The evidence for other bone density assessment techniques

was limited and did not support a change to current practice. Two studies found

possible utility using quantitative computed tomography (QCT) while a single study

found possible utility using radio frequency echographic multi spectrometry (REMS),

an ultrasound based bone density assessment technique, and the committee made

rec ommendations for research on REMS, DXA with trabecular bone score (TBS)

assessment and QCT.

Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D:

accuracy of bone assessment methods.

Finding more information and committee details

To find NICE guidance on related topics, including guidance in development, see the NICE

topic page on mus culoskeletal conditions.

For full details of the evidence and the guideline committee's discussions, see the

evidence reviews. You can also find information about how the guideline was developed,

including details of the committee.

NICE has produced tools and resources to help you put this guideline into practice. For

general help and advice on putting our guidelines into practice, see resources to help you put NICE guidance into practice.

Update information

July 2026: This guideline updates NICE guideline CG146 (published August 2012). It

covers identifying adults who should be assessed for fragility fracture risk, methods of risk

assessment, identifying vertebral fractures, treatment criteria and repeat risk assessment

(timing and methods) for people not having treatment.

The next guideline update will cover risk assessment for people with a learning disability,

treatment (pha rmacological, exercise, calcium, and vitamin D), and treatment monitoring

and pauses. It will incorporate rec ommendations from a multiple technology appraisal

(MTA) on medicines for treating osteoporosis and reducing the risk of fragility fractures

publishing in June 2027.

ISBN: 978 1 4731 9579 0